This week we are wrapping up our Advent and Christmas Tide series here.
Now for the last six weeks or so we have been going through the O antiphons, which became the verses of O come, O come Emmanuel, to guide our study of Jesus and how his coming and his incarnation transforms our lives and our world.
We're looking today at Jesus as the Lord of Might.
And the verse that we sang just a little bit ago is, O come, O come, great Lord of Might, who two thy tribes on Sinai's height in ancient times did give the law in cloud and majesty and awe.
So this week, Tuesday, actually specifically, is also Epiphany, which is a holiday on the church calendar which commemorates the visitation of the Magi to the Christ child.
Epiphany comes from the Greek word Epiphania, which means appearance or manifestation.
This is actually the word that is used most often in the New Testament to talk about Christ's second coming.
And so you see perhaps one of the connections there with Jesus as Lord of might.
Now we're going to be looking at a couple of passages today, Exodus 19, verses 16 to 19, and Matthew 2, verses 1 to 12.
Now, as we prepare to open God's word together today, let's pray.
God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, open our ears, calm our thoughts, open our hearts.
We desire to hear from you.
Speak through me, Lord, the words that you would have us here in silence, anything in me that is not of you.
May the words of my mouth and the meditations of our hearts be acceptable and pleasing to you.
O Lord, our rock and our Redeemer.
Amen.
So just a bit of a preface here before we jump right into Exodus 19.
At this point of the book of Exodus, the people of Israel have been delivered out of Egypt and have been journeying in the wilderness.
This week is actually accidentally slash providentially going to serve as a bit of an establishing scene for the sermon series that we're starting next week.
You know how in a lot of movies, the movie will start with a set of scenes that are like really dramatic.
The protagonist is up against the big evil bad and things like that.
And you're just like, how is this at the beginning of the movie?
And it just grows in anticipation and intensity.
And then it hard cuts to the protagonist, I don't know, waking up two weeks earlier flashes across the bottom of the screen.
This sermon series is a little bit like that for our next sermon series.
Our next sermon series is called Beginning the Journey.
We're going to be looking together at a few chapters from Exodus.
Exodus 15 through 19 to 20-ish.
As we look at the newly freed people of Israel, as they begin their journey in the wilderness and as they were learned to rely on God.
Our passage today will be more or less revisited in six or so weeks at the end of that series, but the important intro info for today
is that the Israelites have come to Mount Sinai, this mountain of the Lord, where God has promised to speak with Moses and his people, to give them the law and to establish a new covenant with his people of Israel.
Now in preparation for this, God tells Moses that the Israelites must consecrate themselves, purify themselves, so that they can be near God's powerful presence.
So the people are to wash their clothes, they are to erect barriers around the base of the mountain.
For God himself will descend on the mountain in God's presence and holiness is so great that if anyone or anything touches the mountain, they must be put to death.
The people cannot even leave their camp to approach the mountain until they hear the sound of trumpet.
So that is where we are picking it up for a few verses starting at verse 16.
Hear these words.
On the morning of the third day after the consecration,
There was thunder and lightning with a thick cloud over the mountain and a very loud trumpet blast.
Everyone in the camp trembled.
Then Moses led the people out of the camp to meet with God and they stood at the foot of the mountain.
And Mount Sinai was covered with smoke because the Lord descended on it in fire.
And smoke billowed up from it like smoke from a furnace in the whole mountain trembled violently.
At the sound of the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses spoke and the voice of God answered him.
skipping forward several centuries to Matthew chapter two.
After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea during the time of King Herod Magi from the east came to Jerusalem and asked, where is the one who has been born king of the Jews?
We saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.
When King Herod heard this, he was disturbed and all Jerusalem with him.
When he had called together all the people's chief priests and teachers of the law, he asked them where the Messiah was to be born.
In Bethlehem, in Judea, they replied, for this is what the prophet has written.
But you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah.
For out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel."
Then Herod called the Magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared.
He sent them to Bethlehem and said, go and make a careful search for the child.
As soon as you find him, report to me so that I too may go and worship him.
After they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen when it rose, went ahead of them, until it stopped over the place where the child was.
When they saw the star, they were overjoyed, and on coming to the house, they saw the child with his mother Mary, and they bowed down and worshiped him.
Then they opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
And having been warned in a dream not to go back to Herod, they returned to their country by another route.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
So I was trying to figure out really this week where this sermon was heading on a deeper level.
And what I feel like I've been given for us today is the idea of complacency.
Complacency in relationships specifically or routine perhaps.
I think this bears itself out within the context of this sermon as we wrap up this entire series and as we're looking forward to the next.
So here's the kind of complacency I'm thinking about in relation to this.
I'm thinking of instances where our relationships become so routine that we forget to truly live into them, that we forget to appreciate them, that we forget just really the weight of the relationships that we are in.
Here's an example.
One of my and Larissa's very good friends is a clarinetist, like DMA and clarinet performance, high caliber kind of person.
I sometimes forget how impressive that is because the day to day we're just sending memes back and forth on Instagram.
Or even if we discuss her teaching schedule or her rehearsal schedule, it kind of just becomes part and parcel, a little bit of routine.
It's not until I really sit with what she's up to or get the chance to watch her or hear her perform that I'm reminded of like, oh, wow, no, she's actually really good at this.
Maybe you have something like this with your friends or your kids or even your spouses, something that kind of resets and re-informs occasionally how you view them and how you interact with them, even though you know their skills and competencies always at some level.
To get more specific, I do need to brag about my wife for a second, which I know is shocking to many of you.
Don't worry, I did ask her if I could do this.
So Larissa recently finished her first draft of the last chapter of her dissertation.
And as head research assistant, I had the privilege of reading over that draft to give comments on clarity and flow.
And now I am always aware.
of how brilliant a scholar my wife is.
But the day to day that kind of gets shuffled back in my brain because we're dealing with more pressing things like our son petting the cat even though the cat has signaled that he doesn't want to be pet.
That happened this morning.
That was a fun thing to deal with.
But the brilliance of Larissa's mind gets shuffled back into my brain for the everyday.
But when I read this chapter draft I was
reminded of, convicted of even, how awesome she is.
That's kind of what popped into my head as I was trying to discern what these passages were telling us today.
Now the people of Israel have found themselves in a much more intense version of this.
They have witnessed plagues brought on Egypt by God
These plagues that show to everyone that God is immensely more powerful and immensely more in control than the gods of Egypt.
They have seen God's power at work for them, delivering them from the Egyptians, parting the Red Sea and rescuing them, providing for them in all of their wanderings in the wilderness, despite all of their complaining, as God led them by a pillar of cloud and fire.
But in spite of everything that's been done for them, I think they have
grown perhaps a bit complacent in the routine in the day to day or week to week of surviving in the wilderness.
But now, now they have come to this mountain in the desert where they have been told that this God, the God of their ancestors, the God who has brought them out of slavery and delivered them will himself be descending to make his presence known.
They have consecrated themselves for three days by washing themselves and their clothes and abstaining from anything that would make them impure before God.
They've been warned by Moses that if they even approach the mountain or set foot on it that they will be put to death because God's presence and holiness are so awesome and mighty.
And our passage tells us on the morning of that third day, there was thunder and lightning with a thick cloud over the mountain and a very loud trumpet blast and everyone in the camp trembled.
Now, do you all do that thing when there is a tornado warning?
And the first thing that you do rather than going into your basement is to actually go outside to see for yourself how bad the weather actually is.
Stand on your porch, watch the storm roll in before you have to decide if you actually have to go into the basement.
Yeah, no, I know you do.
I know you do.
Not supposed to.
We all do it.
But if you ever done this, you know the feeling of trepidation but exhilaration as you watch the power of this storm system rolling.
Now just think of how sometimes that trepidation, that exhilaration, that excitement morphs very quickly into dread and fear.
If you see that the sky is indeed turning that lovely sickly shade of green and you know that this storm at the very least is going to be rough.
You feel suddenly very small and helpless in the middle of the storm.
Now I imagine that's what the Israelites were feeling as they approached this mountain.
This mountain covered in smoke and fire with the ever-loudening sound of a trumpet blast like standing next to a tornado siren.
The Lord Almighty, thunderously speaking to Moses from this cacophony in the presence of all the people.
Cloud, majesty, and awe almost seem like an understatement.
God then speaks directly
to the gathered people, and he gives them the Ten Commandments.
The people are so afraid that they tell Moses to go, to go speak to God on their behalf, to intercede for them, to stand in front of them, because they fear for their lives if God continues to speak to them directly.
Now I love the pairing of this passage with Matthew 2.
like the genie from the 90s Aladdin movie, you know?
Phenomenal cosmic power.
And an itty bitty baby.
Now this is what I'm getting at with the whole complacency and routine thing.
I have felt myself convicted recently to remember to recognize the fact that our God, the creator and sustainer of all things is God who descended with fire
brimstone and cloud and thunder and lightning and a trumpet blast on this mountain, wants to be in relationship with me, wants to be in relationship with us.
He wants us to come together as his people to worship him and to hear from him.
This same God who appeared in this massive cloud and lightning and fire to the Israelites, was made incarnate as a human born of a woman to be a baby.
Now much has said when we read this chapter from Matthew of how God brought these magi, these foreign astrologers to Bethlehem to behold Jesus, how God uses unexpected people for His glory.
We've talked about that even within the sermon series.
We read this story as a part of our Christmas, Christmas-tied epiphany rotation every year, and I think sometimes it gets lost.
The majesty, the importance, the miracle of it all.
We grow complacent in our understanding of it.
So looking at Matthew 2, the Magi come to Jerusalem.
They tell King Herod they have come to worship one who has been born king of the Jews because they saw his star when it rose in the east.
Now due to the Babylonian exile of the people of Judah, it is actually highly likely that these Magi from wherever they were would have had access to and perhaps even read some of the Jewish scriptures and prophecies.
So it's not unheard of.
It's not too far a stretch to say that people outside of Jewish circles would have had an idea about the Jewish Messiah and where he was to be born, roughly.
But that is all impressive in and of itself.
But here's the part that has been really hitting me this season, as I've been looking at this, I've been preparing for this, is the star.
You know, we read this, we decorate our Christmas things with this, you know, nice star that's kind of like floating in the air that the Magi are following and it magically floats over to the manger or the house or wherever it is.
But here's the thing.
There are extant records from China that record a supernova
being visible in the sky for 70 days, around 54-ish BC, which is about the time that Jesus was actually born.
And then there are also other astronomical records that show that there was a conjunction between Jupiter and Saturn a few years earlier in 7 BC that perhaps could have signaled to people who were watching the stars and the planets that a king
Jupiter was to be born in the west, west of them, Saturn.
Now, regardless of whether either of these are the star that is being referred to by the Magi, that's not the important part, but can we sit for just a bit in awe of the idea of God?
shifting the structure of the universe to point people to a baby.
God is timing the orbit of planets, maybe even blowing up a star, blowing up a star to point people
who perhaps do not have true faith in him to point them to the birth of a child to a working-class couple from a tiny village in Galilee.
The Lord of Might became incarnate as a helpless child.
The Lord of Might moving through the wonders of the heavens to mark the birth of this child.
There is more to this than just the immense cosmic significance, though.
The Magize visitation to Jesus to present him with these gifts is also a callback to First Kings, the book of First Kings.
You know, after Solomon, David's son is established as his father's successor, and the king of Israel, after Solomon builds the temple,
The queen of Sheba, which is an ancient kingdom in the Arabian peninsula, the queen of Sheba makes a royal visit to Solomon and gives him spices and gold and precious stones the book First Kings tells us.
Now, the gold and frankincense and myrrh that the mag I give to Jesus are not exact correlations of what the queen gives to Solomon.
But the way in which the gospel writer Matthew sets this account up, the way that he tells it would have caused any well-read Jewish person to think of the Queen of Shiba's visit to Solomon, right?
The Magi are a group of foreign royal dignitaries who are traveling to the region of Judea to bestow luxurious gifts upon a son of David.
just as the Queen of Sheba did all those centuries before.
Except, unlike the Queen of Sheba, the Magi are not ultimately going to the palace in Jerusalem.
They show up to the palace in Jerusalem because they are here to herald a king.
But they're not ultimately going to the palace.
They don't ultimately end up there.
They end up in the far-flung suburbs at a normal house to visit the child of a working-class family.
And the other point that I want us to consider today, I think, is one of the greatest things about the incarnation.
And that is that we have direct access to God.
If we return to Exodus, we return to God speaking with Moses on Mount Sinai.
We read this exchange starting at verse 20.
The Lord descended to the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the top of the mountain.
So Moses went up and the Lord said to him, go down.
and warn the people so that they do not force their way through to see the Lord and many of them perish.
Even the priests who approach the Lord must consecrate themselves so the Lord will break out against them.
Moses said to the Lord, the people cannot come up Mount Sinai because you yourself warned us, put limits around the mountain and set it apart as holy.
The Lord replied, go down and bring Aaron up with you.
But the priests and the people must not force their way through to come up to the Lord or he will break out against them.
So Moses went down to the people and told them.
Now this scene on Mount Sinai here actually corresponds to how the tabernacle, the tent of meeting that the people had in the wilderness and ultimately the temple were to be set up.
Only God's singular chosen has access to God's presence.
Moses in this case.
And this corresponds to the most holy place in the tabernacle and in the temple, where only the high priest could enter.
And even then, the high priest could only enter once a year.
And even then, the high priest had to have a rope tied around his waist, so that if he was in any way impure before the presence of God and was struck down, his fellow priests could drag his lifeless body out, so as not to defile the presence of the most holy place.
Even the one who intercedes on the people's behalf was in danger.
The elders of the people have access to the mountain, but they cannot summit the mountain where Moses is speaking to God.
This corresponds with the holy place, the priest's court, where the priests who serve in the tabernacle in the temple can enter and perform rituals, but the normal people cannot.
And finally, the people of Israel are gathered at the foot of the mountain, which corresponds to the outer courts of the temple and the tabernacle, where the normal people, the everyday people can come and offer sacrifices to God.
But with the incarnation, with Christ's coming, that division is removed because Jesus himself is the ultimate intercessor, an unlike
Any human intercessor, be that Moses, be that a high priest, Jesus does not need to fear death in the presence of God because He is Himself God.
He is one person of the triune Godhead.
The Magi can come and offer gifts to God directly in the Christ child.
This is a foretaste of what happens when Jesus dies on the cross.
The curtain that separates the holy place from the most holy place in the temple is torn in two, removing any barrier that we may have to God.
My friends, we can talk to God.
We have the presence of God in dwelling within us by the power and the presence of the Holy Spirit.
This is the same God who caused all these phenomena that made the people of Israel tremble in fear when they came near his presence.
This is the same God who came to earth as a child taking on the form of a servant or a slave even as Paul says in Philippians being made in appearance of a man.
This is the same God who shifted the structure of the universe to herald the birth of a baby.
But if we return to the idea of routine and complacency, I think we forget this.
Not intentionally.
I don't think, I don't think for the most part we forget this intentionally.
But we forget, we lose the majesty of Christ in our routine.
But it's not, it's not just us.
The Israelites forgot.
Oh boy, do they forget.
Despite all of this fear and trembling and oh no Moses, we can't speak directly with God.
You must go and intercede for us.
Do you know
Remember what they did before Moses even came down the mountain?
They made the golden calf.
They turned away from the God whose presence was right next to them on a mountain.
The whole Bible is full of account after account after account of God's people, forgetting
who it is that leads them, who it is that they worship, whose laws they follow.
Jesus' disciples screw up.
That's what most of Jesus' words are addressing in a lot of the Gospels is the disciples messing it up time after time.
The religious leaders of Jesus' day mess up.
Most of them do not recognize Jesus as the Messiah.
In fact, they outright reject Him as the Messiah.
The early church screwed up all the time.
They forgot who they were and what they were being called to.
That's why most of the letters in the New Testament exist.
It's because Paul and Peter and the other apostles are writing to churches to remind them to get their act together.
It's not just us, my friends.
It's not unique to us.
It's not unique to our time.
This is the story of God's people, as fallen, broken sinners.
We forget.
We need to be reminded of God's power, of who God is, how awesome He is, how mighty He is, and how in His might Jesus humbled Himself to become incarnate as a human.
No, I'm not saying.
Don't get me wrong.
I'm not saying that we need to come in here every week with intense fear and trembling.
Because while we do need to recognize and be reminded of the might and the majesty of Christ whom we worship and adore, we do not have to fear.
Belief in Christ as our Lord and Savior, as the Heideberg Catechism puts it in question and answer 59,
belief in Christ means that in Christ we are righteous.
We are made right before God and we are heirs to life everlasting.
We need not fear as the Israelites did because Christ intercedes for us.
Moses interceded for the people when they were too afraid to be spoken to directly by God and Christ
Christ is the perfect mediator, the perfect intercessor who intercedes to God for us on our behalf.
We can therefore come boldly to God's throne of grace.
We're also recognizing the power of God and of our own sins before Him.
Last week, Pastor Michael referenced the Chronicles of Narnia.
I'm gonna do it again.
We're gonna get a nice double header here.
I thought of the exchange in the lion, the witch, and the wardrobe between Mr. and Mrs. Beaver and the children when I was thinking of this sermon.
The children, the pevency children are hearing about Aslan the lion, the Christ figure in the series for the first time.
And Susan confesses that she is afraid to meet a lion.
which Mrs. Beaver says, well, yes, of course, no one can stand in Aslan's presence without their knees knocking together unless they're incredibly brave or incredibly silly, which then prompts Lucy to ask, then he isn't safe, to which Mr. Beaver then reapplies safe.
Who said anything about safe?
Of course he's not safe, but he's good.
He's the king.
Or is the 2005 movie adaptation tweaks that at the end of the movie, Mr. Thomas tells Lucy, well, he's not a tame lion, but he is good.
Jesus Christ, God Almighty in the flesh.
Well, we need to be reminded of his might and justice.
We can also take solace in his love for us.
C.S.
Lewis, the author of The Chronicles of Narnia, writes this in his book, Mirror Christianity.
The great thing to remember is that, though our feelings come and go, Jesus' love, Christ's love for us does not.
It is not weirried by our sins, it is not weirried by our indifference, our complacency, our routine perhaps.
And therefore it is quite relentless in its determination that we should be cured of those sins, at whatever cost to us, at whatever cost to Jesus.
My friends, this is our Lord of might whose birth we are celebrating.
He humbled himself to become incarnate.
because of his love and his grace for us.
He gave his life to save us from our sins.
He has ascended and will return in all of his might to usher in the new creation.
How can we not praise him?
How can we not give thanks?
Now, yes, we will inevitably lose our sense of awe in the routine.
but let us strive to remind ourselves of this.
May we, like the Magi, come and behold him, the light of the world.
May we behold God in the flesh who gave himself for us.
May we come with fear and trembling, yes, but may we come to him with the boldness that we are granted by our salvation
in Christ.
Amen.